[Polkadot Wiki Migration] Upgrade Your Node (#36)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: infrastructure/validators/operational-tasks/how-to-upgrade-validator.md

keys, it can lead to an [equivocation slash](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-offenses){target=\_blank}.

For this reason, it is advised that validators don't clone or copy the `keystore` folder and instead generate session keys for each new validator instance.

Default keystore path:

```bash
/home/polkadot/.local/share/polkadot/chains/<chain>/keystore
```

## Steps

The following steps require a second validator which will be referred to as `Validator B`. The original server that is in the active set will be referred to as `Validator A`.

### Session `N`

1. Start a second node. Once it is synced, use the `--validator` flag. This is now `Validator B`
2. Generate session keys for `Validator B`
3. Submit a `set_key` extrinsic from your staking proxy with the session key generated from
   `Validator B`
4. Take note of the session that this extrinsic was executed in
5. Allow the current session to elapse and then wait for two full sessions

!!! warning

>       It is imperative you keep `Validator A` running during this time. `set_key` doesn't have an immediate effect and requires two full sessions to elapse before it does. If you switch off `Validator A` too early you may risk being chilled and face a fault within the Thousand Validator Programme.

Reviewer: Thousand Validators still kicking?

Reviewer 2: It is being replaced by the Decentralized Nodes program:
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSc0qkk8aS4eoXFaG5mNVGuZQ3CxK55a_RrFoT_MMq9zwc7uFg/viewform

---
title: Upgrade Your Node

> description: Instructions on how to upgrade your validator node.

Reviewer 3: Desc should be between 120-160 characters

---

> Validators perform critical functions for the network by [backing and including blocks](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-parachains-protocol){target=_blank}. Validators may have to go offline for short-periods of time to upgrade client software or to upgrade the host machine.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Validators perform critical functions for the network by [backing and including blocks](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-parachains-protocol){target=\_blank}. Validators may have to go offline for short-periods of time to upgrade client software or to upgrade the host machine.
```

## Introduction

Validators perform critical functions for the network by [backing and including blocks](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-parachains-protocol){target=\_blank}. Validators may have to go offline for short-periods of time to upgrade client software or to upgrade the host machine. Usually, standard client upgrades will only require you to stop the service, replace the binary and
restart the service. This operation can be executed within a session.

Validators may also need to perform long-lead maintenance tasks that will span more than one
session. Under these circumstances, an active validator may chill their stash and be removed from
the active validator set. Alternatively, the validator may substitute the active validator server
with another allowing the former to undergo maintenance activities.

This guide will provide an option for validators to seamlessly substitute an active validator server
to allow for maintenance operations. The process can take several hours, so make sure you understand the instructions first and plan accordingly.

!!!tip "Keep an eye out on new releases from the community"
    Upgrade or downgrade accordingly.

## Prerequisites

> Before continuining with this guide, ensure you have:

Reviewer 4: Please add some things the user should already be familiar with, might want to read first, stuff to ensure they have installed, etc., before continuing with this guide.

### Session Keys

Session keys are stored in the client and used to sign validator operations. They are what link your
validator node to your staking proxy. If you change them within a session you will have to wait for
the current session to finish and a further two sessions to elapse before they are applied.

> [More info about keys in Polkadot.](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-cryptography#keys){target=_blank}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[More info about keys in Polkadot.](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-cryptography#keys){target=\_blank}
```

### Keystore

Each validator server contains essential private keys in a folder called the _keystore_. These keys
are used by a validator to sign transactions at the network level. If two or more validators sign

> certain transactions using the same keys, it can lead to an [equivocation slash.](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-offenses){target=_blank}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
certain transactions using the same keys, it can lead to an [equivocation slash.](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-offenses){target=\_blank}
```

> For this reason, it is advised that validators DO NOT CLONE or COPY the _keystore_ folder and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For this reason, it is advised that validators don't clone or copy the `_keystore_` folder and
```

> For this reason, it is advised that validators DO NOT CLONE or COPY the _keystore_ folder and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For this reason, it is advised that validators don't clone or copy the `_keystore_` folder and
```

> For this reason, it is advised that validators DO NOT CLONE or COPY the _keystore_ folder and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For this reason, it is advised that validators don't clone or copy the `_keystore_` folder and
```

instead generate session keys for each new validator instance.

Default keystore path - `/home/polkadot/.local/share/polkadot/chains/<chain>/keystore`

## Steps

> The following steps require a second validator which will be referred to as `Validator B`; the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following steps require a second validator which will be referred to as `Validator B`. The
```

original server that is in the active set will be referred to as `Validator A`.

### Session `N`

> 1. Start a second node. Once it is synced, use the `--validator` flag. This is now "Validator B."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Start a second node. Once it is synced, use the `--validator` flag. This is now "Validator B"
```

2. Generate Session keys for **Validator B**
3. Submit a `set_key` extrinsic from your staking proxy with the session key generated from
   **Validator B**

> 4. Take note of the Session that this extrinsic was executed in

Reviewer 3: I'd stick to either `Session` or `session`. IMO `session` it's better but it's up to you :)

5. Allow the current session to elapse and then wait for two full sessions.

> **It is imperative that you keep Validator A running during this time.** `set_key` does not have an

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**It is imperative that you keep Validator A running during this time.** `set_key` doesn't have an
```

immediate effect and requires two full sessions to elapse before it does. If you do switch off
Validator A too early you may risk being chilled and face a fault within the Thousand Validator
Programme.

### Session `N+3`

**Validator B** is now acting as your validator - you can safely perform operations on **Validator
A**.

When you are ready to restore **Validator A**:

> 1. Start **Validator A**, sync the database and ensure that it is operating with the `--validator`
>    flag.
> 2. Generate new Session keys for **Validator A**.
> 3. Submit a `set_key` extrinsic from your staking proxy with the session key generated from
>    **Validator A**.
> 4. Take note of the Session that this extrinsic was executed in.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Start **Validator A**, sync the database and ensure that it is operating with the `--validator`
   flag
2. Generate new Session keys for **Validator A**
3. Submit a `set_key` extrinsic from your staking proxy with the session key generated from
   **Validator A**
4. Take note of the Session that this extrinsic was executed in
```

**Again, it is imperative that Validator B is kept running until the current session finishes and
two further full sessions have elapsed.**

Once this time has elapsed, **Validator A** will take over. You can safely stop Validator B.

> **NOTE:** To verify that the Session has changed, make sure that a block in the new Session is

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should use the note element here:

```suggestion
!!! note
    To verify that the Session has changed, make sure that a block in the new Session is
```

finalized. You should see log messages like the ones below to confirm the change:

```
2019-10-28 21:44:13 Applying authority set change scheduled at block #450092
2019-10-28 21:44:13 Applying GRANDPA set change to new set with 20 authorities

> ```

Reviewer 3: We use the `termynal` element for these outputs. You can check out some examples of it on the master branch in the `.snippets` folder. Anyways, feel free to hit me up for more info on how to use it :)

Reviewer 4: Fixed this!

accordingly.

!!!tip "Keep an eye out on new releases from the community"
    Upgrade or downgrade accordingly.

## Key Components

### Session Keys

Session keys are stored in the client and used to sign validator operations. They are what link your
validator node to your staking proxy. If you change them within a session you will have to wait for
the current session to finish and a further two sessions to elapse before they are applied.

[More info about keys in Polkadot.](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-cryptography#keys){target=\_blank}

### Keystore

Each validator server contains essential private keys in a folder called the _keystore_. These keys
are used by a validator to sign transactions at the network level. If two or more validators sign
certain transactions using the same keys, it can lead to an [equivocation slash.](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-offenses){target=\_blank}

For this reason, it is advised that validators don't clone or copy the `_keystore_` folder and
instead generate session keys for each new validator instance.

Default keystore path - `/home/polkadot/.local/share/polkadot/chains/<chain>/keystore`

## Steps

> The following steps require a second validator which will be referred to as `Validator B`. The

Reviewer: These are steps they most likely (if not, someone on their team) would have already gone through when setting up the original validator. 

I would just add a link to the generating session keys content

> The following steps require a second validator which will be referred to as `Validator B`. The

Reviewer: Another note: I think this page will get heavily updated at some point, so I would link to other places for now where needed

> The following steps require a second validator which will be referred to as `Validator B`. The

Author: I linked the "How to Validate" page, which covers this as a prerequisite.   We can definitely make it flow a little better, though.
